[Music]
good morning welcome to breakfast with
john kay
and naga manchetti good morning our
headlines today perseverance
pays off for nasa as it successfully
lands a rover
on the surface of mars touchdown
confirmed
persevered faithfully on the surface of
mars
ready to begin seeking the sand of past
life
boris johnson will pledge to give away
the majority of the uk
surplus coronavirus vaccines to
developing countries when he chairs a
virtual meeting of the g7 today
good morning how much has the pandemic
cost the public purse
from furlough to extra support for the
nhs
this morning we'll get the figures on
what's being spent and borrowed
and what that means for all of us good
morning on a night of real european
drama
rangers rally late on to edge a seven
goal thriller
let's roll antwerp in belgium with a
winner in the 90th minute
and the stables are staying bbc
breakfast viewers helped raise more than
a million pounds
to keep young people with disabilities
in the saddle
plus an incredibly mild few days to come
one or two can hit 17 degrees but do not
be fooled
plenty of rain around too i'll have your
full forecast right here
on breakfast
[Music]
good morning it's friday february the
19th and nasa
has successfully landed its most
advanced spacecraft yet
on mars where it's going to search for
signs of ancient
life the rover called perseverance
travelled nearly 300 million miles
before navigating a risky landing phase
it was dubbed the seven minutes of
terror here's more from our science
correspondent rebecca morrell we should
warn you this report does contain some
flashing images
perseverance is going about one
kilometer per second
a nerve-wracking weight at mission
control
then celebrations as a signal is
received from mars
its touchdown for nasa's perseverance
rover
and these are its first images a view of
its landing site
the rovers even started tweeting too i'm
safe on mars
perseverance will get you anywhere there
really is no good way to describe
that moment when it's over and you hear
those words
touchdown confirmed just a remarkable
feeling
of of pride in the team
relief and
and really joy thinking forward to this
remarkable service mission that we have
coming up
it survived a fiendishly difficult
landing
burning through the atmosphere at the
speed of a bullet before a complex
landing system brought it to the ground
the rover will now be seeking answers to
a crucial question
this mission is all about finding signs
of life
and the best place to do that is here
the jezreel crater
today it's dry and dusty but billions of
years ago
it was a huge lake and you can clearly
see a river running into it
this gives you an idea of what it would
have looked like
if we zoom in a bit more these green
areas on the edge of the crater
will once beaches on the lakeshore and
the hope is
any microscopic creatures that once
lived there are still preserved
perseverance is the most advanced rover
that nasa's ever built and it's
jam-packed with instruments
its robotic arm is equipped with a drill
to collect rock samples
so what forms of life could they contain
i am not talking about martian little
green men
probably not even fish we're looking for
microbial life or maybe
microbes that have made a little mat or
a slime
of sorts that you that you might find on
the bottom of a pond
those are the types of things that are
likely to well they did exist on earth
three and a half billion years ago
the question is did they exist on mars
at the bottom of lakes
and in a first nasa's mini mars
helicopter will take off
it's a new way to view the planet its
test flight will be in a few weeks
but getting to the red planet is just
the start
now the hard work begins on a mission
that could transform our understanding
of mars
rebecca morale bbc news oh it was so
good
watching it happen last night i was
watching on bbc news and and
what was this what was staggering you'd
only just got your head around the fact
that it
landed successfully and then we could
see the pictures literally 10 11 minutes
after we knew it was landed the photos
were there
but can you imagine how long we were
talking to a scientist yesterday weren't
we um how long that 11 minutes must have
fell
that's true just to have it has it
hasn't it yeah are the joy on their
faces it's so nice to start with some
smiles isn't it on the program
on a friday uh it's five past six other
news to bring you boris johnson will
pledge today
to donate the majority of the uk surplus
covid vaccines to developing countries
the prime minister is chairing a virtual
summit today where he's going to
encourage other leaders including
president biden to follow suit
here's our global health correspondent
naomi grimley
more and more britons are getting their
vaccine shots
today the prime minister will be
chairing a g7 meeting
to talk about those countries which
haven't got started
in the global scramble to secure
vaccines against covid19
many wealthy countries which funded a
lot of the research
have ended up buying more supplies than
they need
new figures from the anti-poverty
pressure group the one campaign
revealed that australia canada japan the
uk the us
and the eu have already secured more
than 3
billion doses 1.2 billion more
than they need to give their entire
populations two doses
the uk government is now talking about
sharing some of its surplus
but campaigners say they want hard facts
on how many actual doses
it will be donating there's over a
billion excess doses that are being tied
up in a pipeline
in these countries and we need to make
sure that they're not sitting stockpiled
in just a few countries but indeed
they're going back
to poorer countries and middle-income
countries so that we can actually get
this virus under control
everywhere the uk has also given half a
billion pounds to kovacs the un-led
program
to get vaccines out to poorer countries
but that project has yet to launch its
first vaccinations
so 130 countries in the world haven't
administered any shots
leaving healthcare workers at high risk
nami grimly
bbc news nearly 20 major healthcare
organizations including the royal
college of nursing and the british
medical association
are appealing to the prime minister for
better protection from coronavirus
they say at least 930 healthcare workers
have now died from covid
and that high-grade equipment is needed
to prevent the transmission of the virus
through the
air they're asking for improved
ventilation and
more consideration of the risks posed to
staff while they work in patients homes
all primary school children in wales
could return to classes by the middle of
next month
if kovid rates continue to fall the
first minister mark drakeford will set
out his plans today for lifting lockdown
restrictions
and it's expected to start with that
gradual reopening of schools
younger primary school children are set
to return on monday
and older pupils could then join them on
march the 15th we're going to speak to
mr drakeford
in about an hour's time more than 2
million people
in the uk have been denied a refund for
flights they were unable to board
because of coronavirus restrictions this
according to research by the consumer
group which
it found that even though the law
prevented travel during lockdown
passengers were not legally entitled to
money back or a guarantee or guaranteed
a successful insurance claim because
the airline didn't cancel the flight
which advises that
we should wait until the situation is
clearer before booking a summer holiday
and that we consider package holidays
over flight only
trips now matt's going to be here in a
moment with stories of
a very mild weekend ahead for us here in
the uk but in texas
we've been reporting on extraordinary
weather there millions of people have
been told to boil their drinking water
because severe wintry weather is
continuing to cause chaos yeah many are
living without power
temperatures have dropped as low as
minus 18 degrees
celsius here's more from our north
america correspondent
lebo de seco
this is one of the richest states in one
of the richest countries in the world
around half of texans are experiencing
disruptions to water supply
for others burst pipes and melting snow
have caused flooding
last night we got power after two days
and we didn't have water
but finally we got water now we have
water everywhere
water companies have battled with frozen
wells treatment plants have been hit
by power outages it's meant 13 million
people have been told
to boil their water before drinking it
the supply of electricity
is slowly being restored but there are
still at least half a million people
without it
we will not stop
until normalcy is restored
to your lives until that moment comes
though
i ask all texans to continue your
efforts
to take the proper precautions that are
needed
to stay safe and to stay warm
if they manage to do that and find water
getting food may still be hard
supermarket shelves are running
dangerously low on supplies
while ordinary texans were freezing
their senator ted cruz headed for the
beaches of mexico
back now after a public outcry over his
absence
while his state was in crisis le
boutiseco
bbc news texas
[Music]
see the headlines as they happen and
watch bbc news live in the app and get
the full story with bbc dot co dot uk
forward slash news follow the story for
all the latest
with bbc news